# Coast Live Oak Project
*By: Caroline Laubach, Ethan Trinh, and Will Callan*
### Project Proposal
Through this project, our group hope to visually explore how the presence of emblematic oak species, such as the coast live oak (*Quercus agrifolia*) and the valley oak (*Quercus lobata*), may be indicative of other social, economic, and even ecological factors in Los Angeles County. For example, does a larger presence of native oaks correlate with higher income areas? Is the presence of wildlife higher in areas with native oaks present? Or what about rates of exposure to harmful environmental events and disasters?  

Significant research, including [this article by Standiford et al.](https://www.fs.usda.gov/psw/publications/documents/psw_gtr184/032_Dagit.pdf) published by the US Forest Service, has shown that coast live oaks are extremely resilient in the face of fire. In the aforementioned article, 96% of trees survived after the Topanga Fire of 1993 burned over 20,000 acres of land in Southern California. Other evidence, such as [this article by the Santa Barbara Botanic Garden](https://sbbotanicgarden.org/insight/can-oak-trees-provide-a-natural-fuel-break/), that oaks have the ability to act as fuel breaks in the case that a fire does indeed break out both by shading out areas that highly flammable invasive species might otherwise grow and retaining high levels of both interior moisture and exterior air humidity that could help slow the spread of a fire directly adjacent to them. Given these insights, greater knowledge about the presence of oaks in Los Angeles County and there location in relation to marginalized populations could provide insights into whether certain parts of the county are increasingly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change-fueled natural disasters as a result of both disinvestment and a lack of native, fire resilient species like the coast live oak. 

At the moment, the scope of our project is just focused on Los Angeles County given the expansive Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI) that has played a large role in discussions around climate mitigation and resilience in Southern California. In addition, the recent outbreak of rapidly spreading fires in the Los Angeles region supply a heightened sense of urgency in regards to finding ways that the county can help to prevent future disasters like the recent Eaton and Palisades fires. Time could also be an interesting scope of study in terms of oaks in the region given the recent spread of the golden oak borer (*Agrilus auroguttatus*), an invasive insect that burrow into oaks during the larval stage of their development nad have greatly decreasing survival rates of oak trees. Thteir presence in Southern California could potentially be linked with increased fire vulenerability in the WUI. 
